===========================================================================================================================
Tutorial 12: Quantum embedding with (time-dependent) embedded mean-field theory: hydrogenation and excitations of pentacene
===========================================================================================================================

:Author: Joseph Prentice
:Date:   August 2023

.. role:: raw-latex(raw)
   :format: latex
..

Introduction
============

The utility of quantum embedding
--------------------------------

Although ONETEP [ONETEP2020]_ makes first principles calculations of
systems containing thousands of atoms feasible, particularly when
using semi-local exchange-correlation functionals, it can still be
very computationally costly to treat entire systems of this size with
higher level theory, such as hybrid functionals, which require the
computation of exact exchange. This is particularly relevant for
excited state calculations, due to the well-known underestimation of
the band gap by semi-local DFT, making excitation spectra performed
with semi-local DFT quantitatively, or sometimes qualitatively
wrong. However, if the physics/chemistry of interest in the system is
known or expected to be localised to a particular subregion -- we call
this the `active region' -- with the rest of the system acting as an
environment influencing the active region, quantum embedding provides
a way to achieve hybrid accuracy with a significantly reduced cost.`

This is achieved by treating the active region alone with the higher
level of theory, with the rest of the system (the environment) treated
at a lower level of theory. In ONETEP at present, this translates to
treating the active region with hybrid DFT, and the environment with
semi-local DFT. This is done within a single self-consistent
calculation, to ensure that the two regions are able to influence one
another. As hybrid DFT is only performed on the active region, which
is typically small compared to the environment, the computational cost
is significantly reduced.

Embedded mean-field theory
--------------------------

There are many different quantum embedding schemes; the scheme used in
ONETEP is embedded mean-field theory (EMFT), originally proposed by
Fornace et al. [Fornace2015]_ This scheme has several advantages,
including two particularly relevant to ONETEP: firstly, it partitions
the system at a basis-set level, which works well with ONETEP's
atom-centred NGWF basis.  Secondly, it is a mean-field theory
throughout, like DFT, which means that many existing methods based on
DFT can be easily modified to accommodate EMFT. This includes
linear-response time-dependent DFT (LR-TDDFT), which allows electronic
excitations to be computed -- we refer to this as TD-EMFT. For more
details, please see the original EMFT paper [Fornace2015]_, and the
papers implementing ground state EMFT [Prentice2020]_ and TD-EMFT
[Prentice2022]_ in ONETEP.

EMFT is also fully compatible with the implicit solvent methods
available within ONETEP, allowing for multi-level modelling of
systems.

Pentacene
---------

In this tutorial, we will look at both ground state EMFT and TD-EMFT,
with the pentacene molecule as our test case. Ground state EMFT is
demonstrated by looking at the terminal hydrogenation energy of
pentacene, following Prentice et al. [Prentice2020]_, and TD-EMFT is
demonstrated by looking at the first excitation energy of
pentacene-doped p-terphenyl, following Prentice. [Prentice2022]_

Ground-state EMFT: terminal hydrogenation of pentacene
======================================================

Non-EMFT baseline calculations
------------------------------

The terminal hydrogenation reaction for pentacene involves two
hydrogen atoms becoming bonded to the two carbon atoms at one end of
the pentacene molecule.

Before using EMFT, we must first obtain the terminal hydrogenation
energy without EMFT, with everything treated with first the PBE, then
the B3LYP functionals. The input files required are ``Pentacene.dat``,
``HydrogenatedPentacene.dat``, and ``H2.dat``.

If you look at these files, you will notice that we have several
different labels for carbon atoms (C1, C2, etc.) and similar for
hydrogen atoms -- these will be used later to vary the size of our
active region, by selecting different atoms to be included within it.

To begin, simply run the input files as they are to obtain the ground
state energy for the three structures at the PBE level. The
hydrogenation energy can then be obtained as:

.. math::
   :label: HydrogenationEnergy

   \Delta E_{\textrm{hyd}} = E_{\textrm{Hydrogenated Pentacene}} - ( E_{\textrm{Pentacene}} + E_{\textrm{H2}} ) .

Make sure you save the ``.tightbox_ngwfs`` file from the ``H2.dat``
calculation for use later!

Now repeat this for B3LYP. In all three ``.dat`` files, change
``xc_functional`` to be ``B3LYP``, and add the following
keywords/blocks to set up Hartree-Fock exchange (deleting any species
labels in the ``species_swri...`` block that are not present in that
particular structure):

::

   %block swri
     for_hfx 3 12 V 12 12 WE2
   %endblock swri

   %block species_swri-for_hfx
   C
   C1
   C2
   C3
   H
   H1
   H2
   H3
   %endblock species_swri-for_hfx

   hfx_use_ri for_hfx
   hfx_max_l 3
   hfx_max_q 12

For more details on the meaning of these keywords, see the HFx
documentation. The most important point for our purposes here is that
we can control which atoms are included in the computation of HFx
through the ``species_swri...`` block -- this will become important
for our EMFT calculations.

For reasons of stability, it is best to start the B3LYP H2 calculation
from the PBE-optimised NGWFs: bring back the PBE-optimised
``.tightbox_ngwfs`` file, and add ``read_tightbox_ngwfs : T`` to
``H2.dat``. Make sure you still keep a copy of the PBE-optimised
``.tightbox_ngwfs`` file safe, as we will need it later.

Run these three calculations and compute the hydrogenation energy at
the B3LYP level.

EMFT calculations
-----------------

4 carbon atoms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can now start to use EMFT to see if we can get close to the B3LYP
result without treating the entire molecule with B3LYP. Initially, our
active region will just include the 4 C atoms closest to the site of
the reaction, and the hydrogen atoms bonded to them. We will only need
to do EMFT calculations for ``Pentacene.dat`` and
``HydrogenatedPentacene.dat`` -- the hydrogen molecule will always be
in the active region, so should always be treated with B3LYP, although
there is one subtlety which will be introduced shortly.

To turn on EMFT, change ``xc_functional`` back to ``PBE``, and add the
following keywords to ``Pentacene.dat`` and
``HydrogenatedPentacene.dat`` (keep the other modifications you
already made for HFx for the moment):

::

   use_emft             T
   use_emft_follow      T
   use_emft_lnv_only    T
   block_orthogonalise  F
   active_xc_functional B3LYP
   parallel_scheme      HOUSE

   %block species_ngwf_regions
   C1 H1
   C C2 C3 H H2 H3
   %endblock species_ngwf_regions

A brief explanation of each keyword:

 - ``use_emft``: this turns on EMFT, so that the active region and
   environment are treated with different levels of theory.
 - ``use_emft_follow``: this toggles whether a non-EMFT calculation at
   the lower level of theory (in this case, PBE) is done first, and
   then uses that as a starting point for the EMFT calculation. For
   this to happen, the value should be ``T``.
 - ``use_emft_lnv_only``: this toggles whether EMFT is used to
   optimise both the NGWFs and the density kernel (value is ``F``), or
   just the density kernel (value is ``T``). Typically, EMFT is only
   used to optimise the density kernel (``T``), as NGWF optimisation
   is poorly behaved under EMFT -- NGWFs can unphysically optimise
   towards the region described by the level of theory that predicts
   the lowest energy, and the block orthogonalisation procedure
   designed to counteract this (discussed shortly) makes the NGWF
   optimisation stall. The NGWFs are optimised at the lower level of
   theory, and then fixed -- the error this introduces is typically
   <1% of the difference between the high and low levels of
   theory. For more details, see Prentice et al. [Prentice2020]_
 - ``block_orthogonalise``: this toggles whether a block
   orthogonalisation procedure is applied to the NGWFs before using
   EMFT. This transforms the NGWFs of the environment so that they are
   orthogonal to the NGWFs of the active region, so the off-diagonal
   blocks of the overlap matrix are 0. This prevents the emergence of
   unphysical solutions that can occur in some systems. For this to
   happen, the value should be ``T``.
 - ``active_xc_functional``: this selects the functional that will be
   used in the active region, whilst ``xc_functional`` selects the
   functional used in the environment.
 - ``parallel_scheme``: this decides how MPI processes should be split
   between the regions. ``HOUSE`` means that the processes are
   distributed proportionally to the number of atoms within each
   region; ``SENATE`` means that the processes are distributed equally
   between all regions; and ``NONE`` means that each region will use
   all the processes in turn. ``HOUSE`` is strongly preferred.
 - ``block species_ngwf_regions``: this assigns species to regions,
   with one region per line. The first line is the active region by
   default.

The first four keywords should be turned to ``T`` in the order they
are listed in. The first three keywords should almost always be ``T``
for an EMFT calculation, with ``block_orthogonalise`` turned on if the
calculation proves unstable without it. Here, we leave it off.

We also need to modify the HFx set-up to match the fact we only want
HFx in the active region. To do this, simply delete any species in the
``species_swri...`` block that are *not* in the active
region. Remember that each species in the active region should be on
its own line in the ``species_swri...`` block, whereas all the species
in the active region should be on the first line of the
``species_ngwf_regions`` block.

Once these additions/modifications have been made, run the
calculations for pentacene and hydrogenated pentacene.

Before we can compute the hydrogenation energy from these results,
there is one more subtlety. As we optimised the active region NGWFs at
the lower level of theory, but the active region density kernel with
the higher level of theory, we need to do the same in our hydrogen
molecule for consistency. To do this, bring back the
``H2.tightbox_ngwfs`` file you saved from the PBE calculation earlier,
and re-run your B3LYP ``H2.dat`` calculation with the following
modifications/additions:

::

   read_tightbox_ngwfs : T
   maxit_ngwf_cg : 0

You can now use these three results to compute the hydrogenation
energy with an active region of this size.

Larger active regions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next, expand the active region to include the 8 carbon atoms
closest to the reaction site. To do this, add the C2 and H2 species to
the active region (remember to remove them from the environment
region!), and modify the HFx set-up to match. Rerun the pentacene and
hydrogenated pentacene calculations, and compute the hydrogenation
energy (you don't need to rerun the hydrogen molecule calculation, as
you can just reuse the result obtained using PBE-optimised NGWFs).

Finally, expand the active region further to include the 12 carbon
atoms closest to the reaction site, by adding C3 and H3 to the active
region. Re-calculate the hydrogenation energy.

If you plot the hydrogenation energy vs. the size of the active
region, you should see the hydrogenation energy approach the full
B3LYP result. This demonstrates the ability of EMFT to obtain high
level results at a reduced cost, even when the boundary between
regions cuts through covalent bonds.

This also demonstrates the importance of selecting the appropriate
active region. In systems made up of weakly bonded parts
(e.g. molecular crystals, solvated systems), the appropriate active
region will often be obvious -- it will be the molecule or molecules
of interest (examples of multiple-molecule active regions could
include a nearest-neighbour dimer or a solute along with some
nearest-neighbour solvent atoms). In extended covalent or ionic
systems, the choice of active region may be more difficult, and should
be carefully converged, in a similar way to that shown in this
tutorial.

Further investigations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To further investigate the use of EMFT in ONETEP, you could look at
the effects of:

* changing the active region further
  -- perhaps including more C atoms, excluding H atoms, etc.,
* using block orthogonalisation,
* using other functionals for either the high or low level of theory -- semi-local functionals can be used for the higher level although this is of course not expected to produce a significant advantage

... and many other possibilities.  

TD-EMFT: excitations of pentacene-doped p-terphenyl
===================================================

Non-EMFT benchmark
------------------

Here, we will be looking at the S0 to S1 transition in pentacene,
which is the lowest excited state observed in TDDFT. This is
significantly affected by the environment. In particular, we are
interested in pentacene-doped p-terphenyl, which is of interest for
room-temperature maser applications, and how the p-terphenyl
environment affects the excitation energy.

To give us a reference for isolated pentacene, we first need to
perform a high-level TDDFT calculation for pentacene. We will again
use B3LYP as our high-level theory. The input file is
``Pentacene_isolated.dat`` -- as this tutorial assumes you are already
familiar with running TDDFT calculations with ONETEP, we will not go
into any detail, and this calculation can just be run as it is.

TD-EMFT calculation
-------------------

We now perform a TD-EMFT calculation for a pentacene molecule
surrounded by 6 p-terphenyl molecules, as extracted from the
pentacene-doped p-terphenyl molecular crystal. The input file is
``Pentacene_in_p-terphenyl.dat``. This can be run as it is, but one
point regarding EMFT should be noted first. The general set-up of the
EMFT calculation is precisely the same as for ground state EMFT, with
one addition: the ``species_tddft_kernel`` block. By using this block,
we can specify which species we will restrict our excitations to be
localised on. Given that in a TD-EMFT calculation we expect the
excitations of interest to be localised within the active region, the
species contained within the ``species_tddft_kernel`` block should be
a subset of those in the active region. Typically, the two will be
identical, i.e., the contents of the ``species_tddft_kernel`` block
should be the same as the first line of the ``species_ngwf_regions``
block. For more details, see the LR-TDDFT documentation.

Run this calculation -- this may take some time. If you compare this to the
results in Prentice [Prentice2022]_, you can see that the result is
very close to the experimental value of 2.09 eV.

You can plot the resulting excitation as a ``.cube`` file, and
visualise it using e.g. VESTA.


Files for this tutorial
=======================

 - :download:`Pentacene.dat <_static/tutorial_12/Pentacene.dat>`
 - :download:`HydrogenatedPentacene.dat <_static/tutorial_12/HydrogenatedPentacene.dat>`
 - :download:`H2.dat <_static/tutorial_12/H2.dat>`
 - :download:`Pentacene_isolated.dat <_static/tutorial_12/Pentacene_isolated.dat>`
 - :download:`Pentacene_in_p-terphenyl.dat <_static/tutorial_12/Pentacene_in_p-terphenyl.dat>`
 - :download:`C_NCP19_PBE_OTF.usp <_static/tutorial_12/C_NCP19_PBE_OTF.usp>`
 - :download:`H_NCP19_PBE_OTF.usp <_static/tutorial_12/H_NCP19_PBE_OTF.usp>`


References
----------

.. [ONETEP2020]  J. C. A. Prentice, J. Aarons, J. C. Womack, A. E. A. Allen, L. Andrinopoulos, L. Anton, R. A. Bell, A. Bhandari, G. A. Bramley, R. J. Charlton, R. J. Clements, D. J. Cole, G. Constantinescu, F. Corsetti, S. M. M. Dubois, K. K. B. Duff, J. M. Escartin, A. Greco, Q. Hill, L. P. Lee, E. Linscott, D. D. O'Regan, M. J. S. Phipps, L. E. Ratcliff, A. Ruiz Serrano, E. W. Tait, G. Teobaldi, V. Vitale, N. Yeung, T. J. Zuehlsdorff, J. Dziedzic, P. D. Haynes, N. D. M. Hine, A. A. Mostofi, M. C. Payne, and C.-K. Skylaris, *The ONETEP linear-scaling density functional theory program*, J. Chem. Phys. 152, 174111 (2020).
		 
.. [Prentice2020] J. C. A. Prentice, R. J. Charlton, A. A. Mostofi, and P. D. Haynes, *Combining Embedded Mean-Field Theory with Linear-Scaling Density-Functional Theory*, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 16, 354 (2020).

.. [Prentice2022] J. C. A. Prentice, *Efficiently Computing Excitations of Complex Systems: Linear-Scaling Time-Dependent Embedded Mean-Field Theory in Implicit Solvent*, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 18, 1542 (2020).

.. [Fornace2015] M. E. Fornace, J. Lee, K. Miyamoto, F. R. Manby, and T. F. Miller, *Embedded Mean-Field Theory*, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 568 (2015).
